---
layout: post
title: "20 Things (that I want to learn)"
description: "Over the next n time units, I plan to learn a number of new things and blog about them. Sound any good?"
category: 20-things
tags: ["programming", "20 things"]
---

For the past 2 years or so, I have been writing predominantly JavaScript. While
I have mixed feelings on JavaScript as a language, the ecosystem is both awesome
and utterly terrifying. There are so many options for every aspect of
development and tooling that
the
[choices can be paralyzing](https://hackernoon.com/how-it-feels-to-learn-javascript-in-2016-d3a717dd577f). The
glut of options for, well, everything has caused me to focus more on deciding
which technologies I really want to learn and for which ones I can be content in
my ignorance.

In the spirit of being intentional about what to learn, I have compiled a list
of 20 technologies that interest me. My plan is to learn at least enough about
each one to carry on an intelligent conversaion about it and eventually do a
deep dive on the ones that I enjoy the most. I plan to share my experience in
this learning process as I go, so I'll be posting to the blog as a work through
each item.

The 20 things I would like to learn are - in no particular order:

* Containers without docker
* ARM assembly
* Building a columnar database
* Blockchain
* Rust Programming Language
* Linux filesystems
* How an OS Works
* strace
* Raft consensus protocol
* Device drivers
* Type inferrence
* Go language
* Neural networks
* TCP
* Distributed filesystems and storage
* Etherium Smart Contracts
* Falcor
* BSD Jails
* GPU Programming
* Algorithmic trading

Let me know if there are any topics that you'd like me to cover first or in more
depth, just let me know in the comments. I hope that this learning journey is
interesting/helpful!
